Buddha is what? Actually, this is the very word "Sangye," translated "Buddha" into "Sangye."
And "Sangye" has two meanings, meaning of the purification and meaning of the actualizations.
So, "San" means "purified." "Gye" means "actualized," and that combination is called "Sangye."
That translated "Buddha" in the Tibetan language as "Sangye."
The many great masters told me that the "Sangye" is more stronger than the Sanskrit word "Buddha"
because it doesn't carry exactly the meaning of what really "Buddha" is.
"Buddha" is the word of the word, the language of the word of the "Sangye,"
where it carries exactly what the "Buddha" is. Really, many told me.
So, in Sanskrit, the "Buddha" means what? What actually means kind of smart ones.
Smart, smart. And I understand also, in Russian languages, when you call someone "smart" or
something,
they call it "Buddhi." "Buddhi," something. I've heard it. "Buddhi," no? "Buddhi," no? "Buddhi?"
"Awakened." Yeah. "Buddhi" means "awakened," right? Yeah, so. So. I heard that.
So this "Buddhi" is not currently carrying exactly what really "Buddha" is.
The Tibetan word really carries. If they were these great masters, these such great masters,
that's what they called the emanated masters and dasmatas. Really, when they created these termin
ologies,
they created them, and at the century, by the time of the "Kintuzong Devli," or encouragement of "K
intuzong Devli,"
and "Granthuzong Devli," "San" and "Granthuzong" really meant so much. The marvelous, actually,
that job, the marvelous, that some remarkable, that at that time, at the beginning of the time,
the Tibetan language is just a language. There's nothing, terminology, all these things.
But that, they created this language. They made that with so many things,
and created the world. World, and perfectly, beautifully, in the upper world,
9th century, up to 9th century, 10th century. All those great translators, the Tibetan translators,
so many came. They don't have to do any new things. All just follow with that language,
what they created already. The world, you know, "Vakabolu" is. This is what, how really it is.
For that reason, these great translators, such as Verochara, Kava Partha, Jorulu, Jamsi,
Hengi, Hidam, there's so many others, and great masters, Sheyata, Ratata, and Guru Pemma Sambhavai,
and Kamala Shala, and Vamala Mathana, and then, as it is, when they also taught great masters in
their time in Jana, Jana Mathra, Nana Shala, they go. Really, just, I can't believe, I mean,
this short period of time, the complete astonishment.
The whole system of dynamic, complex city, language, you know, "Vakabolu" is. That case,
the science of the mind, and the science of logics, and art, and beauty, all create,
the completely sufficient language, the creative, and perfectly, totally meaningful. I mean, so,
every angle you look, it has value, it has substation, the heaviness, weight, weight it has.
So, this Buddha, for example, like, Buddha have been talking, "Sang" means "purified".
Also, "Sang" is also "purified" as in the Russian. Say it like that, "Wake up". "Sang" means "wake
".
"Wake". "Wake". "G" means "devil up". "Devil up". So, what that means "purified"?
All the "wake up" means "wake up from the ignorance". All the two obscurations.
Or "purified" the two obscurations. And when you "purified" the two obscurations,
one is "come up", then "devil up". Then the Muslims "devil up", "compassion" the full "devil up".
"Vascular" the "compassion", or in the teaching, you say, "said", the "vascular" that "undersaid",
exactly meaning of the Absolute Truth. "Vascular" that "undersaid", exactly meaning, or exactly as
conventional levels, that two "Vasthas", completely different. "Vasthas" is not just a "Vasthas"
wise one,
"Vasthas" is completely combined, inseparable, with a great "compassion" that "devil up".
That is what the Buddha is.